---
title: The next _N_ FRBs
---

I was in Montreal last week for the annual CHIME/FRB project meeting. It was an
intense experience -- as these meeting often are -- but intense in a good way,
as well as loads of fun.

The face-to-face nature of the meeting just makes the group dynamics so much
more energetic than our weekly teleconferences. And since we've had a very
productive year, with some ground-breaking results and a strong publication
streak since the New Year, the energy over the progress of the project was
palpable and enthusiasm infectious.

So, what's on our plate? I'm sure I won't spill any beans by saying there will
be more detailed analyses of the many FRBs we found to date, as hinted at the
[AAS meeting in January](../../01/15/CHIME-FRB-big-media-splash.html) and various
astro workshops since then. On the instrumental side, there is ongoing work to
better understand the telescope's behaviour, which means lots of unglorified
scripts to capture and plot data for calibration against various radio-sources,
scripts for daily and monthly reporting of various aspects of its behaviour, and
better dashboards for the science pipeline operation. Our nascent "extras"
cluster for running pipeline-initiated post-processing analyses as well as
scheduled reporting is off to a good start, and we are busily expanding the
number of services that are run using this framework.

There is also a sense of urgency hanging over us, with less than a year left in
the grant for the remaining full-time developers. (Oh, the -- perhaps? --
unintended consequences of Canadian science funding models!) This doesn't mean
that no development will happen after that, but it will be entirely left to the
science staff (i.e., mostly the postdocs and grad students). They will have less
time to spend focused on extended development tasks, so the team's goal is to
have any major items wrapped up by the end of the year at the latest. After that
point, we want to be in a stable science mode, with the pipeline running itself
with little operator intervention required.

Lastly, there is a huge amount of work to be done transferring all the knowledge
built up over the last two years among the technical staff to the scientists who
will be run the show from now on. One thing we definitely should have done
better on this project is have a better collective ownership of the software
infrastructure. It is true that we were spread very thinly, and so naturally
focused on whatever areas one was the best fit and zoomed through tasks without
taking time to teach others (especially the scientits) about the required
background. There were some practical limits to how much "teaching" is
reasonable -- e.g., it makes no sense to have every grad student master IP
networking and Cisco switches -- but it's definitely coming back to bite us now.
