---
title: The understated awesomeness of Usenix
---

Last year, when it was time to renew my ACM memberhsip, I let it lapse and
joined Usenix instead. It was a largely symbolic decision, yet it still felt
momentous -- I had been a member of the ACM since I was in grad school
(conference discounts!!), but for the last decade neither went to its events and
conferences, nor actually needed it to access the Digital Library, since my
employer, UBC, had an institutional membership and I could download at work any
paper I wanted.

UBC was also paying my annual membership, through it professional development
fund, so there was no cost in continuing to renew, plus it also got me a monthly
subscription to CACM. I enjoyed CACMs article mostly in proportion to how close
to the back they were. Article in the "cool tech news" section at the front were
obvioulsy written by general tech reporters: shallow and sometimes reading as if
they were cribbed over from a university press release. After a while, I learned
to just skip over the entire section, because reading it was sometimes so
useless that I would feel like I'd wasted a whole evening on watching trash TV.

The middle pages were hit-and-miss. Analyses of systemic problems, whether in
academic publishing, or career participation by women and minorities were
important and I'm glad ACM does it, but also far removed from my work
environment. Technical articles could be excellent, like Poul Henning-Kemp's and
other I've quoted in this blog. I also loved the relatively new series [_Research for
Practice_][RfP] (started in 2016), in which two experts in the area introduce a
short selection of papers on a topic of current and practical relevance, for
example "Cluster scheduling for datacenters" ([May 2018, pp. 50-53][may-2018]). On
the other hand, an issue could just as easily have its middle section contain
stuff like Erik Meijer explaining yet another variation of LINQ like it was a
greatest discovery on Earth [^1], or some truly stereotypically dry scholastic
treatise with little relevance outside someone's tenure review. I suppose those
were the CACM's equivalents of a quiet day in the newsroom.

Lastly, there were the "ACM Reviews" at the back, which were selected from the
best conference publications 3-4 years prior, sometimes with a few of them
grouped by topical similarity and with a one-page introduction by an editor. I
loved those article and always read them, even if there was little chance of my
ever using, much less expanding on, the techniques they presented.

But then I was somehow reminded of Usenix's _;login:_, which I knew but hadn't
thought of for many years, and realized that I not only enjoyed reading it more,
but that with its systems focus it was also very relevant to my job. It also
came out only four times a year, and the increased SNR was quite important in my
mind, as I looked at the "to-read" pile of CACMs on the shelf.

Also, there was an almost romantic element to my decision: Usenix was clearly
a much smallheer operation than ACM, with a shoestring staff and a very
plainly-produced single publication -- a stark contrast from ACMs stable of
glossies, awards galas, and C-suite execs. Despite this, or maybe because of it,
Usenix is committed to open access. Proceedings of its conferences are freely
available to anyone immediately after the conference. ACM, on the other hand,
has been debating open access for years, and starting a few years back finally
explicitly permitted the posting of preprints to sites like arXiv. The latest
[annual report][ACM2018] even promises a "preprint server in collaboration with
ArXiv" for the DL's upcoming new platform (p. 4), but given just how essential
institutional subscriptions to the DL are to ACM's budget, I just don't see it
ever going open to the extent of Usenix. (This is not necessarily a bad
tradeoff, since it allows ACM to develop programs and activites that need doing
and that nobody else does, and the cost is still much less than for a for-profit
publisher.)

After just two issues of _;login:_, I can say I'm very happy with my decision.
The articles are great, whether they be programming tips (although I'm a bit sad
to see that I joined just as the long-running Perl column [ended]), descriptions
of data centre architectures, or book review. (One already prompted me to buy
the book, review to come soon.) And it's a bit hard to say exactly why, but
_;login:_ also reminds me of the time when as a young undergraduate I worked as
a student sysadmin in the University computing centre, and read each issue of
UNIX Review and Dr Dobbs' Journal cover-to-cover as it appeared, back in the
glory days of UNIX when the market could still suport half a dozen major
companies (and a couple of holy, as well as legal, wars).


But I'm even happier to see that this is not the _;login:_ nor Usenix of the 80s
Unix workstations, but one firmly rooted in the present and looking ahead to the
future. There is definitely more Go than Perl inside the magazine, and the
classic conferences, LISA and ATC, are more relevant then ever in this age of
hyperscaled data centres and operating systems mutating in all sorts of
directions to deal with the multitude of immensely intensive workloads --
virtualized, containerized, massively distributed, with microsecond-scale I/O,
including hybrid hardware and smart peripherals, etc.

But there are also well-timed new venues, such as the recently-finished
Conference on Operational Machine learning ([OpML]) and whose
[summary][OpML-blog] was the final nudge I needed to write this post. In a
single day event, it included panel discussions and technical presentations from
both academic and industrial participants on their experiences managing the
machine learning production lifecycle. Similarly, SRECon, a series of three
regional conferences (Americas, EMEA, Asia/Pacific), is packed chockful with
talks on practical aspects of growing and operating large services reliably
(duh). Just looking at the program makes me feel sad to have missed it (or
rather them, as every regional program is different), but also proud at the
state of art in my field. It's a good time to be in systems!

[^1]: I do like LINQ, but CACM must have given it more space over the last ten years than any other technology

[ACM]: https://academia.stackexchange.com/questions/65531/submitting-acm-conference-papers-to-arxiv
[ACM2018]: https://www.acm.org/binaries/content/assets/about/annual-reports-current-fy/acmarfy18.pdf
[ended]: https://www.usenix.org/publications/login/spring2019/blank-edelman
[OpML-blog]: https://www.usenix.org/blog/reflections-2019-usenix-conference-operational-machine-learning-opml-19
[OpML]: https://www.usenix.org/conference/opml19/program
[RfP]: https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2016/9/206259-introducing-research-for-practice/fulltext
[may-2018]: https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2018/5/227184-research-for-practice/fulltext
