---
title: On the A20 line
---

I have to grant it: the [Osdev] wiki is nothing if not thorough. For instance,
their page on enabling the [A20] line lists no fewer than four methods for
enabling it, with the recommended sequence being:

> 1. Test if A20 is already enabled - if it is you don't need to do anything at all
> 2. Try the BIOS function. Ignore the returned status.
> 3. Test if A20 is enabled (to see if the BIOS function actually worked or not)
> 4. Try the keyboard controller method.
> 5. Test if A20 is enabled in a loop with a time-out (as the keyboard controller method may work slowly)
> 6. Try the Fast A20 method last
> 7. Test if A20 is enabled in a loop with a time-out (as the fast A20 method may work slowly)
> 8. If none of the above worked, give up 

N.B.: Each of these steps has a fairly lengthy sequence of steps to implement it _correctly_.

(Andries Brouwer's keyboard FAQ [chapter][ab_a20] on this topic is not as well
organized and my eyes glazed over about half way down reading about bugs... er,
finer points of 20+ year-old hardware, but it must contain at least a few more
different methods and variations.)

Meanwhile, _xv6_, for instance just [uses][xv6_boot] the keyboard controller method:

```
  # Physical address line A20 is tied to zero so that the first PCs 
  # with 2 MB would run software that assumed 1 MB.  Undo that.
seta20.1:
  inb     $0x64,%al               # Wait for not busy
  testb   $0x2,%al
  jnz     seta20.1

  movb    $0xd1,%al               # 0xd1 -> port 0x64
  outb    %al,$0x64

seta20.2:
  inb     $0x64,%al               # Wait for not busy
  testb   $0x2,%al
  jnz     seta20.2

  movb    $0xdf,%al               # 0xdf -> port 0x60
```

This works perfectly well for a learning OS that's mostly going to be run in
QEMU. A bit more surprising is that -- nowadays at least -- even [FreeBSD] uses
the same method, with the extra bit of safety of waiting for the keyboard
controller a lot longer (64K "ready" checks) before giving up assuming that "the
hardware is probably legacy-free and simply doesn't have a keyboard controller.
Thus, the A20 line is already enabled."

To be fair to Osdev wiki, their mindset is "what's the right way to do this, not
the fastest or easiest". Still, I can't help but wonder if all of these delicate
and -- let's be frank -- cargo-cultish steps are at all relevant on any hardware
built in this century. On the other hand, I'm very glad they're all documented
*somewhere*, especially as the first hardware that's likely be used for any
"learning Osdev" forays is exactly something from the discards from the last
century that we all have in a box somewhere on the shelf in the garage. I
suppose a bit more editorial organization, summarizing the current "state of the art" wouldn't hurt.

(I think I just increased my knowledge of low-level PC hardware details by
several orders of magnitude. And I'm not even sure how I ended up going down this
particular rabbit hole, as I'm not even involved in OS development!)


[Osdev]: https://wiki.osdev.org
[A20]: https://wiki.osdev.org/A20
[ab_a20]: https://www.win.tue.nl/~aeb/linux/kbd/A20.html
[xv6_boot]: https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-public/blob/master/bootasm.S#L21
[Freebsd]: https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd/blob/ae6222b0c3494c3ec754ff9dd42367f813087472/stand/i386/pxeldr/pxeldr.S#L234
